README.md, before:

# roomba_rest980

Integrate your iRobot Roomba with Home Assistant using rest980, and the cloud (optional).  

> Braava jet/mops are now available *with partial support!* If anyone has one of these mops and is willing to test, please do so and make an issue if anything goes wrong, or anything is missing! 

## Features

- [x] Native Vacuum entity
- [x] Cloud API connection
  - [x] Cloud MQTT connection
    - Testing: I've reverse engineered their MQTT stack somewhat* (but not all available commands) and am still figuring out how it works.
- [x] Actions
  - [x] Start
    - [x] Favorites
      - This feature requires more testing, to make sure it's actually initiating a favorite cycle.
    - [ ] Clean all rooms by default
    - [x] Selective room cleaning
    - [ ] Two pass feature
  - [x] Pause
  - [ ] Unpause
    - Testing: It may restart a run instead of unpausing.
  - [x] Return Home
  - [x] Stop
  - [x] Spot Clean
  - [ ] Mapping Run
- [x] Dynamically grab rooms and add them to the UI (Cloud only)
  - [x] Selective room cleaning
  - [x] Grab room data
  - [x] Create map image
- [x] Entity attribute parity with jeremywillans' YAML config entry

## Why?

I found that working with [jeremywillans/ha-rest980-roomba](https://github.com/jeremywillans/ha-rest980-roomba) was nice and almost effortless, but I'd prefer to not have a YAML configuration and work with it by a more native integration that adds entities and isn't bound to making a lot of helpers per room.

## Setup

### Prerequisites / Recommendations

- HACS
- rest980
  - If you don't have it yet, don't worry; this guide will show you how to add it.
- Rooms mapped/setup in iRobot app
  - Note that everytime you remap and a room changes, it's ID may change (local users)!
- Knowledge of your Roomba and rest980 servers' IPs

> I recommend that you use https://github.com/PiotrMachowski/lovelace-xiaomi-vacuum-map-card as this is almost done being integrated with it.  
> The only feature that requires testing is the selection of rooms (is separate from using the switch-based built in).

## Step 1: Setting up rest980: Grab Robot Credentials

If you already have it setup, and you know its url (like `http://localhost:3000`), you may skip this step.  
First, you must gather your robot's on-device password and BLID (identifier).

> NOTE: You cannot have the iRobot app running on your phone, or anything else connected to it during this step!

<details open>
  <summary>
  For Docker users
  </summary>
Execute this command:  
  
```sh
docker run -it node sh -c "npm install -g dorita980 && get-roomba-password <robotIP>"
```

and follow the on-screen instructions.
</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  HA Add-on by jeremywillans
  </summary>

Add `https://github.com/jeremywillans/hass-addons` to the Addons tab.
Locate and install the `roombapw` addon, following the included instructions.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  Other HA installation method
  </summary>

If you dont have direct access to Docker, you can clone and install the dorita980 package locally.  
See [dorita980's instructions on how to get the credentials](https://github.com/koalazak/dorita980#how-to-get-your-usernameblid-and-password).

</details>

### Setting up rest980: Bringing The Server Up

Now that you have your robot's IP, BLID, and password, we need to actually start rest980.

<details open>
  <summary>
  For Docker users (docker-compose)
  </summary>

[Download the docker-compose.yaml file, and bring the service up.](docker-compose.yaml)

To bring the service up (just rest980) and leave it in the background, run

```sh
docker-compose up -d rest980
```

You may also add the service to an existing configuration. You do not need to add file binds/mounts, as there are not any.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  HA Add-on by jeremywillans
  </summary>

If you haven't, add `https://github.com/jeremywillans/hass-addons` to the Addons tab.
Locate and install the `rest980` addon, then update and save the configuration options with the credentials you got from the previous step.
> NOTE: Rest980 Firmware option 2 implies v2+ (inclusive of 3.x)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>
    Other HA installation method
  </summary>

  Clone and start the [rest980 server by koalazak, and note your computer's IP and port.](https://github.com/koalazak/rest980)

</details>

## Step 2: Setting up the Integration

rest980 will gather all the data about our robot, but the integration will format it perfectly by creating entities and a vacuum device.

<details open>
  <summary>
  For HACS users
  </summary>
  Search for the addon ("iRobot Roomba (rest980)", it's in the public repository now!) and install it!
</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  Other HA/integration installation method
  </summary>
  Clone this repository, https://github.com/ia74/roomba_rest980 , and add the custom component folder (`roomba_rest980`) to your Home Assistant's `config/custom_components` folder. You will need to reboot HA.
</details>

When you install the integration and restart Home Assistant, you may notice it picking up your Roomba.

![Discovery](img/discovery.png)

This is not due to your rest980 API server being discovered, rather the integration finding your Roomba on the local network.

> If you do not see this, that is okay; it only means HA was able to fully detect a roomba through it's network identifiers.

## Step 3: Adding your Roomba!

If you see the autodiscovered integration, press "Add".  
If not, simply press "Add Integration" and search for "iRobot Roomba (rest980)".  
> Note: Do not add the native Roomba integration! That is a different implementation.

You'll be presented with this popup. 

![Adding the robot](img/ADD.png)

Input your rest980 server's url like so:

```
http://localhost:3000
```

and don't leave any trailing /s.

You may also input your iRobot credentials now, if you want to use cloud features that are coming soon. You must check "Enable cloud features?" for the cloud API to be used.

If you did it right, you'll see a success screen that has also gotten your given name for the Roomba!

![Added the config!](img/ADDeD.png)

If all has gone right, checking the device will show something like this:

![Added the config!](img/fin.png)

## Step 3.5: Cloud issues.. (Cloud)

iRobot does some unknown things with their cloud API. As of current, my implementation does not use the cloud MQTT server (yet), only their HTTP API. However, even with the iRobot app and every instance of a connection closed, you may get ratelimited (*sometimes*) with the error "No mqtt slot available". The integration handles this by auto-reloading. The local state is not interrupted.

## Step 4: Rooms! (Cloud)

Your rooms will be auto-imported, alongside a clean map view, much like the one from the app.  
This allows you to selectively clean rooms, and control it by automation (tutorial later).  
Rooms you select will be cleaned in the order you select. Two-pass functionailty coming soon as well.

![Added the config!](img/rooms.png)

Room types and names are also dynamically imported as to be expected.

To work with this, switch the "Clean (room)" switches on in the order you like, then press the Clean button from the vacuum's entity!

![Room selection](img/clean.png)

## Step 4: Rooms! (rest980 ONLY)

TO BE CONTINUED...
Rooms are not given to us easily when we're fully local, but a fix is in progress for that.

## Important Note

From this part on, the guide will not diverge into Cloud/Local unless required and will assume you are using Cloud features, but most of it should be generically implemented.

## Step 5: Robot Maintenance / Done!

> Unfortunately, this is not implemented yet..

## "Backwards" Compatibility

The integration adds all the attributes that you would expect from [jeremywillans implementation](https://github.com/jeremywillans/ha-rest980-roomba), making it compatible with [the lovelace-roomba-vacuum-card](https://github.com/jeremywillans/lovelace-roomba-vacuum-card).

You may see the code for this in [LegacyCompatibility.py](custom_components/roomba_rest980/LegacyCompatibility.py)

![Compatibility](img/compat.png)

One minor issue is that the Vacuum entity only supports these states:
```
Cleaning: The vacuum is currently cleaning.
Docked: The vacuum is currently docked. It is assumed that docked can also mean charging.
Error: The vacuum encountered an error while cleaning.
Idle: The vacuum is not paused, not docked, and does not have any errors.
Paused: The vacuum was cleaning but was paused without returning to the dock.
Returning: The vacuum is done cleaning and is currently returning to the dock, but not yet docked.
Unavailable: The entity is currently unavailable.
Unknown: The state is not yet known.
```
Since the Roomba reports a much more extensive cycle/phase output, I added an attribute "extendedStatus" that gives you "Ready", "Training", "Spot", etc.

Commit message:

Add more than one roomba section

README.md, after:

# roomba_rest980

Integrate your iRobot Roomba with Home Assistant using rest980, and the cloud (optional).  

> Braava jet/mops are now available *with partial support!* If anyone has one of these mops and is willing to test, please do so and make an issue if anything goes wrong, or anything is missing! 

## Features

- [x] Native Vacuum entity
- [x] Cloud API connection
  - [ ] Cloud MQTT connection
    - Testing: I've reverse engineered their MQTT stack somewhat* (but not all available commands) and am still figuring out how it works.
- [x] Actions
  - [x] Start
    - [x] Favorites
      - This feature requires more testing, to make sure it's actually initiating a favorite cycle.
    - [x] Clean all rooms by default
      - With no rooms selected, this is the default behavior.
    - [x] Selective room cleaning
    - [ ] Two pass feature
  - [x] Pause
  - [ ] Unpause
    - Testing: It may restart a run instead of unpausing.
  - [x] Return Home
  - [x] Stop
  - [x] Spot Clean
  - [ ] Mapping Run
- [x] Dynamically grab rooms and add them to the UI (Cloud only)
  - [x] Selective room cleaning
  - [x] Grab room data
  - [x] Create map image
- [x] Entity attribute parity with jeremywillans' YAML config entry

## Why?

I found that working with [jeremywillans/ha-rest980-roomba](https://github.com/jeremywillans/ha-rest980-roomba) was nice and almost effortless, but I'd prefer to not have a YAML configuration and work with it by a more native integration that adds entities and isn't bound to making a lot of helpers per room.

## Setup

### Prerequisites / Recommendations

- HACS
- rest980
  - If you don't have it yet, don't worry; this guide will show you how to add it.
- Rooms mapped/setup in iRobot app
  - Note that everytime you remap and a room changes, it's ID may change (local users)!
- Knowledge of your Roomba and rest980 servers' IPs

> I recommend that you use https://github.com/PiotrMachowski/lovelace-xiaomi-vacuum-map-card as this is almost done being integrated with it.  
> The only feature that requires testing is the selection of rooms (is separate from using the switch-based built in).

## Step 1: Setting up rest980: Grab Robot Credentials

If you already have it setup, and you know its url (like `http://localhost:3000`), you may skip this step.  
First, you must gather your robot's on-device password and BLID (identifier).

> NOTE: You cannot have the iRobot app running on your phone, or anything else connected to it during this step!

<details open>
  <summary>
  For Docker users
  </summary>
Execute this command:  

```sh
docker run -it node sh -c "npm install -g dorita980 && get-roomba-password <robotIP>"
```

and follow the on-screen instructions.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  HA Add-on by jeremywillans
  </summary>

Add `https://github.com/jeremywillans/hass-addons` to the Addons tab.
Locate and install the `roombapw` addon, following the included instructions.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  Other HA installation method
  </summary>

If you dont have direct access to Docker, you can clone and install the dorita980 package locally.  
See [dorita980's instructions on how to get the credentials](https://github.com/koalazak/dorita980#how-to-get-your-usernameblid-and-password).

</details>

### Setting up rest980: Bringing The Server Up

Now that you have your robot's IP, BLID, and password, we need to actually start rest980.

<details open>
  <summary>
  For Docker users (docker-compose)
  </summary>

[Download the docker-compose.yaml file, and bring the service up.](docker-compose.yaml)

To bring the service up (just rest980) and leave it in the background, run

```sh
docker-compose up -d rest980
```

You may also add the service to an existing configuration. You do not need to add file binds/mounts, as there are not any.

### More than 1 Roomba

If you have more than one Roomba, check out [the two-robot docker compose file.](docker-compose-two-robots.yaml).

You need to run 1 instance of rest980 *per robot*.  
The setup remains the same once in Home Assistant, except the ports must change.  
Note down your rest980 servers ports and which robots they correspond to!

</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  HA Add-on by jeremywillans
  </summary>

If you haven't, add `https://github.com/jeremywillans/hass-addons` to the Addons tab.
Locate and install the `rest980` addon, then update and save the configuration options with the credentials you got from the previous step.
> NOTE: Rest980 Firmware option 2 implies v2+ (inclusive of 3.x)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>
    Other HA installation method
  </summary>

  Clone and start the [rest980 server by koalazak, and note your computer's IP and port.](https://github.com/koalazak/rest980)

</details>

## Step 2: Setting up the Integration

rest980 will gather all the data about our robot, but the integration will format it perfectly by creating entities and a vacuum device.

<details open>
  <summary>
  For HACS users
  </summary>
  Search for the addon ("iRobot Roomba (rest980)", it's in the public repository now!) and install it!
</details>

<details>
  <summary>
  Other HA/integration installation method
  </summary>
  Clone this repository, https://github.com/ia74/roomba_rest980 , and add the custom component folder (`roomba_rest980`) to your Home Assistant's `config/custom_components` folder. You will need to reboot HA.
</details>

When you install the integration and restart Home Assistant, you may notice it picking up your Roomba.

![Discovery](img/discovery.png)

This is not due to your rest980 API server being discovered, rather the integration finding your Roomba on the local network.

> If you do not see this, that is okay; it only means HA was able to fully detect a roomba through it's network identifiers.

## Step 3: Adding your Roomba!

If you see the autodiscovered integration, press "Add".  
If not, simply press "Add Integration" and search for "iRobot Roomba (rest980)".  
> Note: Do not add the native Roomba integration! That is a different implementation.

You'll be presented with this popup. 

![Adding the robot](img/ADD.png)

Input your rest980 server's url like so:

```
http://localhost:3000
```

and don't leave any trailing /s.

You may also input your iRobot credentials now, if you want to use cloud features that are coming soon. You must check "Enable cloud features?" for the cloud API to be used.

If you did it right, you'll see a success screen that has also gotten your given name for the Roomba!

![Added the config!](img/ADDeD.png)

If all has gone right, checking the device will show something like this:

![Added the config!](img/fin.png)

## Step 3.5: Cloud issues.. (Cloud)

iRobot does some unknown things with their cloud API. As of current, my implementation does not use the cloud MQTT server (yet), only their HTTP API. However, even with the iRobot app and every instance of a connection closed, you may get ratelimited (*sometimes*) with the error "No mqtt slot available". The integration handles this by auto-reloading. The local state is not interrupted.

## Step 4: Rooms! (Cloud)

Your rooms will be auto-imported, alongside a clean map view, much like the one from the app.  
This allows you to selectively clean rooms, and control it by automation (tutorial later).  
Rooms you select will be cleaned in the order you select. Two-pass functionailty coming soon as well.

![Added the config!](img/rooms.png)

Room types and names are also dynamically imported as to be expected.

To work with this, switch the "Clean (room)" switches on in the order you like, then press the Clean button from the vacuum's entity!

![Room selection](img/clean.png)

## Step 4: Rooms! (rest980 ONLY)

TO BE CONTINUED...
Rooms are not given to us easily when we're fully local, but a fix is in progress for that.

## Important Note

From this part on, the guide will not diverge into Cloud/Local unless required and will assume you are using Cloud features, but most of it will match up.

## Step 5: Robot Maintenance / Done!

> Unfortunately, this is not implemented yet..

## "Backwards" Compatibility

The integration adds all the attributes that you would expect from [jeremywillans implementation](https://github.com/jeremywillans/ha-rest980-roomba), making it compatible with [the lovelace-roomba-vacuum-card](https://github.com/jeremywillans/lovelace-roomba-vacuum-card).

You may see the code for this in [LegacyCompatibility.py](custom_components/roomba_rest980/LegacyCompatibility.py)

![Compatibility](img/compat.png)

One minor issue is that the Vacuum entity only supports these states:
```
Cleaning: The vacuum is currently cleaning.
Docked: The vacuum is currently docked. It is assumed that docked can also mean charging.
Error: The vacuum encountered an error while cleaning.
Idle: The vacuum is not paused, not docked, and does not have any errors.
Paused: The vacuum was cleaning but was paused without returning to the dock.
Returning: The vacuum is done cleaning and is currently returning to the dock, but not yet docked.
Unavailable: The entity is currently unavailable.
Unknown: The state is not yet known.
```
Since the Roomba reports a much more extensive cycle/phase output, I added an attribute "extendedStatus" that gives you "Ready", "Training", "Spot", etc.
